---
layout: page
title: Updates
permalink: /updates/
---

# Updates

## Just Animate 2.1.0
_August 10th, 2017_

This update contains some developer experience updates and bugfixes.

### Added set() to... Set Things 
In this release, ```set()``` has been added to the timeline.  This function adds values to the timeline at the end of the timeline.  The ```at``` property can be used to choose a different position if the end of the timeline isn't desired.  If ```at``` is after the end of the timeline, it will automatically expand the timeline to that point.  For instance, the following code can be used to set the initial value for transformOrigin.

```js
var t1 = just.timeline()

t1.set({
    targets: '.my-element',
    web: { transformOrigin: 'center center' }
})

t1.set({
    at: 1000,
    targets: '.my-element',
    web: { transformOrigin: '0% 0%' }
})
```
In that example, the timeline's duration would be increased to 1000ms. The set() function can also be passed an array to set multiple things in one function call

### Expanded add() and fromTo()

To improve the experience with ```add()``` and ```fromTo()```, they were expanded to accept an array of animation options as well.  

#### fromTo()
With ```fromTo()``` this helps because you can adjust the times for three animations without having to adjust the from and to values three times.  Consider the following code differences

**Last Version**

```js
var t1 = just.timeline()

t1.fromTo(0, 1000, {
    targets: '.target1',
    ...
})
t1.fromTo(0, 1000, {
    targets: '.target2',
    ...
})
t1.fromTo(0, 1000, {
    targets: '.target3',
    ...
})
```

**This Version**

```js
var t1 = just.timeline()

t1.fromTo(0, 1000, [
    {
        targets: '.target1',
        ...
    },
    {
        targets: '.target2',
        ...
    },
    {
        targets: '.target3',
        ...
    }
])
```

#### add()
With ```add()```, an array helps because the starting point for all options passed at the same time is the same.  In other words, the following code would have required ```fromTo()``` in the previous version because target2 and target3 occur at the same time:

```js
var t1 = just.timeline()

t1.add({
    targets: '.target1',
    duration: 1000,
    ...
})

t1.add([
    {
        targets: '.target2',
        duration: 1000,
        ...
    },
    {
        targets: '.target3',
        duration: 1000,
        ...
    }
])
```


## Just Animate 2.0.0
_August 8th, 2017_

After months of work, Just Animate 2.0.0 is released!  This version has many exciting features and a radically improved developer experience.

### Greatly Improved Timeline
A lot of work went into improving the timeline to make it work with Web Animations API and with normal property interpolation alike.  

#### Yo-yo and the Infinite Timeline
The timeline can now be set to play indefinitely and also alternate each time it repeats.  The following code plays the animation forever and alternates between playing it forward and backward... like a yoyo!

```js
var t1 = just.animate({
    targets: '.something-else',
    duration: 1000,
    ...
})

t1.play({ 
    repeat: Infinity, 
    alternate: true 
})
```

#### Timeline Gets Its Own Functions
To make it easier to build complex web choreography, timeline has its own function and has several new ways of adding events to the timeline.  The following code adds three animation events to the timeline in a sequence:

```js
var t1 = just.timeline()

t1.fromTo(0, 1000, {
    targets: '.first',
    ...
})

t1.add({
    duration: 1000,
    targets: '.second',
    ...
})

t1.add({
    from: 2000,
    to: 3000,
    targets: '.third',
    ...
})

t1.play()
```

The ```add()``` function adds the animation at the end of the timeline, but can be overriden using the ```to``` and ```from``` properties.  There is also a ```fromTo()``` function to make it easy to have fine-grained control. 

### Props, Attributes, and CSS Variables Join The Fray

#### Props are Pretty Awesome!
Prior to version 2.0.0, the focus of Just Animate has been only on the Web Animations API.  In this version, it is simple to also animate any numeric property on JavaScript objects or swap between discrete values.  Using the ```props``` property, you can animate just about anything.  The following code transitions between 0 and 100 on an object over 1000 milliseconds:

```js
var myTarget = { x: 0 }

var t1 = just.animate({
    target: myTarget,
    duration: 1000,
    easing: 'linear',
    props: { x: 100 }
})

t1.play()
```

This feature makes it possible to choreograph position, rotation, and other properties of canvas libraries such as PixiJS and ThreeJS!  By hooking into the ```update``` event on the timeline, you can even control the render cycles of those libraries.  When the target is an HTMLElement, it will automatically assign props to attributes when applicable.

#### CSS Variables and Attributes
CSS Variables are a great way to make websites more reactive and animate new types of things.  If the target is an HTMLElement and the property name starts with a double dash (--name), Just Animate will automatically get and set it as a CSS Variable. The following code animates a linear gradient as a progress bar (something that you can't currently do with the WAAPI alone):

```css
.progress-bar {
    background: linear-gradient(
        to right,  
        #7AC7C4 calc(var(--progress) * 1%), 
        white calc(var(--progress) * 1%), 
        white
    )
}
```
```js
var t1 = just.animate({
   targets: ".progress-bar",
   duration: 6000,
   props: {
     '--progress': [0, 100]
   }
})
```

### Better WAAPI Integration

#### Web Changes For the Better
To improve integration with the Web Animation API and to remove weird edge cases, the fill, iteration, and direction properties have been removed from individual animations. The same effects can be achieved using the repeat, alternate, and the player functions.  Additionally, all properties are now animated independently to allow for per property easings.  To make room for additional property animations, WAAPI animations have been moved to the web property.  For example, the following code fades in from the left:

```js
var t1 = just.animate({
    targets: '.element',
    duration: 1000,
    web: {
        opacity: [0, 1],
        x: [-200, 0]
    }
})
```

#### Transform is Transformed
Transform shorthands are more flexible in Just Animate 2.0.0.  Instead of relying on an implicity order, the order that transform properties appear on the timeline are the order that they are applied.  To keep things simple, the transform property cannot be used in conjunction with x, y, z, scaleX, scaleY, scaleZ, scale, rotate, rotateX, rotateY, rotateZ, or perspective on the same target.

### Easier Sequences
A top-level sequence helper has been added to make creating sequential animations even easier.  Here is an example of how to use it:

```js
var t1 = just.sequence([
    {
        targets: '.first',
        duration: 1000,
        ...
    },
    {
        targets: '.second',
        duration: 1000,
        ...
    },
    {
        targets: '.third',
        duration: 1000,
        ...
    }
])
```
The sequence() helper returns a timeline,  so more animations can be added very easily.

### Staggering Animations

To make staggering target animations easier, a stagger property has been added:

```js
var t1 = just.animate({
    targets: '.list-item',
    stagger: 100,
    ...
})
```

This property moves each target resolved by ```targets``` down the timeline by its value.  If for example, '.list-item' resolved three targets, the first animation would play at 100ms, the second at 200ms, and the third at 300ms.

### Retired Features

#### Mixins/Presets Don't Make the Cut
The initial goal with 2.0.0 was to remove unused or heavy features. Presets accounted for one half of the library's size and and were not used extensively.  They were removed to reduce the size of the library.  This includes the mixin system and the easings outside of normal CSS keywords.

#### String Expressions are Quieted
The string expression for time was also removed.  This feature allowed a developer or designer to say '100ms' or '.1s' instead of using a number of milliseconds for durations and times.  While this seems like a handy feature, it made the API more complicated than necessary and combined with += notation, it added to the library's size.  To keep things simple for everyone, this has been removed.  There is no loss in functionality, all times are in milliseconds, and to do += things, a function can be used the same way as it could be used in 1.x:

```js
var t1 = just.animate({
    targets: '.something',
    duration: 1000,
    delay: (target, index, targetLength) => index * 100,
    ...
})

t1.play()
```

#### Autoplay Gets Turned Off
This is a smaller change, but animations no longer autoplay.  Removing this feature makes sense because it encourages developers and designers to build animations ahead of time and to be more selective about firing them.  Animations now have an active and inactive phase.  Calling .cancel() removes all effects and effectively resets the targets.
